---
time: 202304111249
title: "boundary layers"
type: long
---

when a fluid meets a solid surface, e.g. the edge of an airplane wing or a 
spoon stirring tea. ilya intermolecular forces that decelerate the fluid 
rapidly in a thin boundary layer along the surface. this deceleration gives rise 
to circulation and vorticity into the flow. the vorticity diffuses into the 
bulk flow, thickening the boundary layer.

I don't understand p745. if the fluid is nonbarotropic due to spatially variable 
chemical composition or spatiallly variable T, then pressure gradients can also 
create vorticity, as described by the first term on the RHS of the vorticity 
evolution law, ˝-δivp × ¥divρ/ρ⁽2⁾˝. physically: when the surfaces of constnat 
pressure (isobars) don't coincide with the surfaces of constant density 
(isochors) then the net pressure force on a small fluid element doesn't pass 
thru its centre of mass.


ilya 3 common srcs of vorticity in FD:
  (1): coriolis forces, when the ref frame is rigidly rotating
  (2): lorentz forces, when the fluid is magnetised and electriclally conducting 
  (last two terms in eqs 14.7-14.15 - eqs. curving shock fronts, when the fluid 
  speed is supersonic. 

ex 14.10: vorticity generated by a spatula: fill a bathtub with water and 
sprinkle baby powder liberally over the water's surface to aid in viewing the 
motion of the surface water. THEN: take a spatula, insert it gently into the 
water, move it slowly, and briefly perpendicular to its flat face, then extract 
it gently from the water. twin vorticies should have been generated. observe the 
vortices' motions. explain the generation of the vortices, and the sense in 
which the velocity field of each vorte convects the other vortex thru the 
ambient water. use your bathtub or swimming pool to perform other experiments on 
the generation and propagation of vortices.

